What caught my eye was WSJ reporting about a new form of tourism in China--touring factory floors. This is not a new phenomenon. I remember touring the Boeing factory in Seatle and Totoya in Nagoya as a showcase of the engineering prowess of the manufacturers. A side: there is something beautiful about craftsmanship as reflected in giant steel and alumninum machines. 

I've always been amazed at the news that China appears to have caught up in engineering one industry after another, not the fact it would, but the speed at which it did so. It started with solar panels, then phones, now EVs, and soon perhaps airplanes (COMAC). Why (could you help frame this as a question and  puzzle)

The interesting strategy relevant aspect is that the industries that China caught up and now surpassing incumbents in ones going through transformational changes in how products are produced. A phone is still a phone, a car is still car. But to some extent, a flip phone isn't quite the same product as a smart one. A combustion engine isn't quite the same as an electric motor. 

One consumer lens I find easy to see this is repiribility. When I first started using iPhone, I was most impressed not by its functionality but how different repair process unfolds--basically when my iPhone was broken, likely Apple would just replace it with a new one if under warranty. Only a naive person would think this is due to the generousity of Apple Inc. I think the notority of how expenseive to fix Tesla (which insurance companies are well aware and price into premium) is the same underlying logic. 

It is the integerity of the machine that makes these products execel. If fixing such a machine requires teraring apart the system, it might as well replace the whole set. This is different from a flip phone or a  combustine engine car which is produced following the modular wisdom of twentith century manufacturing. 

Now back to the quesiton why China can catch up quickly: 
1. the smart version of phoens and cars are new products (despite carrying the same names)
2. the integrity of the system commands greater value than the combination of the modules--Chinese-style manufacturering is amazing at putting things together and customizing to consumer needs (perhaps worth a different post), especially when they can source the most advanced components. 
3. the knowledge accumulation processes differ. To excel at producing combustion engines, it requries decades of, sometimes century-long, experience accumulation. The trial & error process is expensive, and it is difficult to learn at low scale (one needs to produce massive qualtity, likely over time, to be able to observe patterns and finetune processes). Smart phone and EVs are different. One can learn a lot within a relatively short period of time because they are an assembly game. 

obviously confoudnign factors exist. Chian's industrial policy would help explain away parts of the observed catch-up speed. So is the perhaps (add another factor)

Strategy lesson here is: ... 

